misconceptions
fallibilism is the stance that we can
always be
objectively wrong
this means there is something to be
objectively wrong about
so it implies realism
while at the same time rejecting
relativism the idea there is no way of
being objectively wrong and also
dogmatism the idea that sometimes about
some things at least one cannot possibly
be wrong because one has found the final
truth this idea that it is possible to
get to the final truth that the truth is
manifest as karl popper said only ever
leads to tyranny that may seem like a
bold claim and it may be but that does
not make it any less true and yes i said
true there because there is nothing
about this stance that rejects truth the
opposite
it is just that we can never know we
have found the truth but our best
explanations must contain truth for if
they are good explanations then
objectively they solve a problem they
work
but they can only work by saying
something correct something correct
about the world something true but they
will always also contain
misconceptions we are fallible and no
single theory can possibly describe
everything in other words
every theory every explanation is a
misconception david deutsch once said
that it would have been better for the
broader understanding of the process of
science had we all long ago agreed not
to call theories theories but rather
misconceptions
so we would have the scientific
misconception of gravity and the
scientific misconception of evolution by
natural selection or of climate change
particle physics or tectonic plates and
what happens is that we over time
replace one deep explanatory
misconception with another by correcting
some errors by finding just a little
more truth truth we cannot quantify in
truth we cannot speak exactly but truth
nonetheless and those errors are
corrected in truth those are genuine
problems solved with the new explanation
the new better misconception papa wrote
quote there is only one way to science
or to philosophy for that matter to meet
a problem to see its beauty and fall in
love with it to get married to it and to
live with it happily till death do you
part unless you should meet another an
even more fascinating problem or unless
indeed you should obtain a solution but
even if you do obtain a solution you may
then discover to your delight the
existence of a whole family of
enchanting though perhaps difficult
problem children for whose welfare you
may work with a purpose to the end of
your day's end quote he may have
understated things there for if you do
find a solution you will indeed discover
more problems they will be revealed to
you
four in standing on the shoulders of
giants you can see further more problems
more errors more misconceptions but
those are more interesting those are
better problems to have
a vaccine is a solution but it's never
perfect but it is far better than vast
numbers of people simply being infected
with whatever the disease is so too for
any medical intervention this is why we
have the term
side effects
new better problems so your hair fell
out and you felt quite tired and ill but
you did not die from the cancer
einstein's theory of general relativity
solved problems newtonian gravity could
not like anomalies with mercury's orbit
but in doing so it opened up a vision of
reality that was more grand and filled
with new problems not conceivable before
space and time as a fabric that could
warp and bend forming effects like
gravitational lensing it opened up the
problem of how to build a global
positioning system of super high
precision now coded into all mobile
phones with google maps for location
finding it revealed the possibility of
gravitational waves and therefore the
problem of how to detect them but should
we expect general relativity to contain
no misconceptions quite the opposite it
too must be a misconception but how we
do not know only that it must be because
it cannot be the final word
nothing can as well as general
relativity works it cannot be the final
story because it conflicts with quantum
theory both purport to be universal
claims about physical reality but they
cannot be the final complete word there
must be some successor to both despite
they're both making astonishingly
precise predictions despite their
solving of problems they can't be the
final word there must be successes to
them both or a single successor and to
that another for we will never have a
theory that explains everything from the
motion of fundamental particles and the
behavior of space and time through to
how life evolves and why historical
events happen and how human beings make
the choices they do and why jrr tolkien
didn't write more books so because no
single theory can explain everything
there is always something it will be
missing always some misconception it has
about how to explain the world and we
are fallible anyway we who create the
explanations we cannot guarantee
anything we find is error-free anything
we create is error-free all is a woven
web of guesses
all is a great tapestry of misconception
coming to represent reality a little
better over time but never capturing at
all just correcting errors here and
there and there are infinite errors
they are everywhere and always will be
but we make progress nonetheless by
correcting them and moving from
misconception to ever better
misconception